# Overview

* Running on top of Hadoop MapReduce and Apache Spark, the Apache Crunch™ library is a simple Java API for tasks like joining and data aggregation that are tedious to implement on plain MapReduce. The APIs are especially useful when processing data that does not fit naturally into relational model, such as time series, serialized object formats like protocol buffers or Avro records, and HBase rows and columns. [Ref](http://crunch.apache.org/index.html)

* The Apache Crunch project develops and supports Java APIs that simplify the process of creating data pipelines on top of Apache Hadoop.[Ref](http://crunch.apache.org/getting-started.html)

* One of the most common questions we hear is how Crunch compares to other projects that provide abstractions on top of MapReduce, such as Apache Pig, Apache Hive, and Cascading.
** Developer focused. Apache Hive and Apache Pig were built to make MapReduce accessible to data analysts with limited experience in Java programming. Crunch was designed for developers who understand Java and want to use MapReduce effectively in order to write fast, reliable applications that need to meet tight SLAs. Crunch is often used in conjunction with Hive and Pig; a Crunch pipeline written by the development team sessionizes a set of user logs generates are then processed by a diverse collection of Pig scripts and Hive queries written by analysts.
** Minimal abstractions. Crunch pipelines provide a thin veneer on top of MapReduce. Developers have access to low-level MapReduce APIs whenever they need them. This mimimalism also means that Crunch is extremely fast, only slightly slower than a hand-tuned pipeline developed with the MapReduce APIs, and the community is working on making it faster all the time. That said, one of the goals of the project is portability, and the abstractions that Crunch provides are designed to ease the transition from Hadoop 1.0 to Hadoop 2.0 and to provide transparent support for future data processing frameworks that run on Hadoop, including Apache Spark and Apache Tez.
** Flexible Data Model. Hive, Pig, and Cascading all use a tuple-centric data model that works best when your input data can be represented using a named collection of scalar values, much like the rows of a database table. Crunch allows developers considerable flexibility in how they represent their data, which makes Crunch the best pipeline platform for developers working with complex structures like Apache Avro records or protocol buffers, geospatial and time series data, and data stored in Apache HBase tables.

